[Music]
imagine you're stuck on the slopes of
Mount Everest there's no one to help you
for frozen miles around and you can't
move for some reason although you've
sent a distress signal the night has
already fallen and you've lost all hope
but then out of the cold darkness a beam
of light blinds you it's a rescue
helicopter coming for you at last
despite a weirdly popular opinion this
situation is possible
tricky granted but rescue helicopters do
fly at night and not only rescue once
police and fire choppers do to the myth
about night flight operations might have
appeared because of one fad helicopters
are really difficult to fly and that's a
real problem that can preclude a chopper
from flying at night but it depends on
many more factors than just poor
visibility first helicopters have a
rather low altitude limit unlike jet
airliners which fly at heights of about
36,000 feet choppers rarely climb higher
than 15,000 feet the altitude record for
a helicopter stands at 40,000 820 feet
but that's the absolute maximum you
can't go any higher on That Bird this
has to do with the difference in how
they fly with airplanes you have to fix
wings technically even one but that's
another story and powerful jet engines
that propel the aircraft forward the
wings and engines combined give the
airplane the amount of lift necessary to
fly at high altitudes when it comes to
helicopters though the picture is rather
different they have one or two rotors
with long blades that lift the craft
into the air now think of it in terms of
altitudes and you'll see where I'm going
thanks to jet engines and fixed wings
airplanes move fast and can support
themselves at great altitudes without
loss of control no wings for helicopters
means that all they could do is rotate
those blades faster to keep the height
but there's only so much speed they can
muster
so choppers tend to behave badly
the air gets thinner yet this isn't all
there is to it
helicopters are not designed for high
velocity flights but although they're
slower they're much more mobile and can
take on missions that are literally
impossible for airplanes for one
choppers don't require a runway all they
need to take off or land is a clear
space of a diameter that allows their
blades to turn safely
this makes them indispensable in rescue
operations like in my very first example
secondly they can hover in the air
thanks to their constructions this also
helps in different kinds of situations
rescuing people extinguishing fires
deploying troops or whatnot
and thirdly helicopters are generally
smaller than airplanes which combined
with their lower speed makes them very
maneuverable that's one of the main
reasons why it's choppers that are sent
to search for lost people from the air
not airplanes take mountains for
instance no aircraft can fly in ranges
such as the Himalayas because the
turbulence above them is downright
dangerous for airplanes and their high
speed makes flying between the mountains
on low altitudes all the riskier not to
mention there's no space for an airplane
to land so helicopters it is then but
despite all their advantages over
airplanes choppers have many potential
dangers too which makes flying them a
risky business helicopters don't have an
ejection system you probably know that
fighter jets and some other airplanes
are equipped with an emergency system it
allows the pilots to catapult from the
cockpit and save their life in case of a
serious threat but the thing is they get
ejected straight up leaving the aircraft
to fall to the ground now if you just
remember that a helicopter has those
swiftly rotating blades above the
cockpit you'll realize that such a
system is simply not applicable to
choppers so the pilot has to stay inside
the machine no matter what while
reducing the chances of survival in case
of a crash they have much weaker
protection airplanes are built to
withstand huge pressures and high speeds
they have a thick hull and sturdy
windshields which protect them from even
occasional birds that might slam into
the plane they'd have to make an
emergency landing after that sure enough
but in most cases they'll be just fine
with helicopters is much less safe they
don't need such protection because they
don't fly as high or as fast an extra
armor would just increase the cost of
their production neither civil
helicopters nor emergency service ones
have any special reinforcements so
they're basically unprotected in the air
according to the FAA low-flying
helicopters are particularly vulnerable
because of drones if one of those
automated fliers collides with a chopper
it can result in a crash more often than
not same goes for birds too but at least
the feathered guys have brains of their
own and know better than to mess with
helicopters they can't fly in bad
weather well they obviously can't but
it's very dangerous in fact much more so
than flying an airplane apart from the
reasons I've already mentioned there are
other hazards that are specific to
helicopters only one of them is icing
when the air is particularly humid and
the temperature freezing ice can appear
on the helicopter surfaces it might seem
like a nuisance but given the pretty
fragile construction of these aircraft
you shouldn't be surprised that ice may
cause control issues or even crashes low
visibility is another huge problem for
choppers since a pilot can't take off
our land when they don't see their
surroundings clearly a single mistake at
this point might cost them the expensive
aircraft and their own priceless life
but even good weather can pose a threat
since there's such a thing as clear air
turbulence or CAA
it's an unpaired
the bull condition that occurs when
there are no clouds and the aircraft is
flying at a higher altitude the slowly
moving air in the atmosphere collides
with a rapid air currents created by the
helicopters rotor blades resulting in
turbulence it can be a dangerous thing
and only experienced pilots know how to
deal with it effectively helicopters are
hard to control I've already mentioned
it earlier compared to planes
helicopters are a real challenge to fly
take for instance a Coast Guard chopper
responding to a distress call from the
sea during a storm to rescue the crew of
a sinking ship the pilot will need to
hover the aircraft directly over it
fighting not only the fierce winds but
the waves as well the ship will be
bobbing on them and constantly shifting
its position so the helicopter should be
able to adapt to these chaotic movements
and it's not a 5-minute operation you
know sometimes rescue ops may take up to
an hour so it's a real test of endurance
and skill for the pilot also there's a
reason why choppers mostly don't have an
autopilot some of the newer aircraft do
have this function but up until just a
few years back it was unheard of in an
airplane autopilot basically keeps the
aircraft on its course set by the human
pilot it doesn't need to run any complex
commands apart from staying on the
airplane can then fly itself almost
effortlessly since it's gliding through
the air with the help of its turbines
and wings in a helicopter an autopilot
could only be useful on long-haul
flights with minimum obstacles on the
way if the pilot ever needs to stop and
hover in the air they'll have to do it
manually because it's a complex
operation one case that explains it all
a helicopter pilot shared a story about
how he accidentally knocked his
headphones off mid-flight they couldn't
be readjusted with just one hand so he
had to land the chopper put the
headphones back on his head and only
then take off again
you simply can't take both your hands
off the steering in a helicopter and
don't get me started on helicopter
parents they don't know when to stop
hovering over their kids but hey that's
a whole different video so if you learn
something new today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
videos I think you'll enjoy just click
to the left or right and remember stay
on the bright side of life